Elliot started kindergarten last week.  So far things are going pretty
well.  He likes learning new things and he seems smitten with his
teacher.  One day last week was "his favorite day of kindergarten"
because they "did math".  I am pretty sure Elliot, and the other kids,
are going to have a good year.

<img src="http://barelyenough.org:www/wordpress/wp-content/uploads/kindergarten-photo.jpg" alt="Elliot on his first day of kindergarten"/>

The parents of kindergartners, on the other hand, are already having a
bit of trouble communicating effectively.  I fear for what this might
mean over the course of the year.  As a parent you, of course, want do
what you can to enhance the education of the children.  You have to do
it with a group of people who you have never even meet before the
first day of school.  Worse yet those people are only loosely
committed to the project.  Personal issues, personality conflicts or
simple disinterest in the task at hand can easily remove many
individuals from the effective team at any moment.

It will be interesting to see how the parents self organize over the
year.  Fortunately, the parents are just support for the teacher.
Even if we fail to form a cohesive team i think the teacher will still
manage to educate the kids.  That is what professionals do.

Speaking of the profession of teaching, the politics teachers have to
manage is rather impressive.  Even for a class of 25 kindergartners it
must be daunting... you have to maintain the interest and respect of
25 kids; keep about 50 parents placated and helping as much as
possible; all while keep the principle happy.  And to make that more
complicated really none of those people get to choose if they really
want work with any of the others.  And all that before you even get to
the job at hand.




